[chore] Non-normative guidance for status metrics (#2472)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/non-normative/how-to-write-conventions/status-metrics.md

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Status Metrics

> aliases: [status-metrics]

Reviewer: curious why is this necessary?

Reviewer 2: I think it's only needed (aliases) if you've moved a document so URL links aren't broken.

You can remove aliases

  - [Naming](#naming)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Definition

For the purposes of this document, a "status metric" is a metric used to
represent something being in a particular state at a given time from a closed
set of distinct possible state values.

## Design

To represent a metric of this nature, the design will look like the following:

```yaml
id: metric.example.status
type: metric
metric_name: example.status
stability: development
brief: "The current state."
note: |
  A timeseries is produced for every possible value of `example.state`. The
  value of this metric is 1 for a state if it is currently in said state, and
  is 0 for all other states.
instrument: updowncounter
unit: "1"
attributes:
- ref: example.state
```

### Instrument

The metric is
[instrumented as an `UpDownCounter`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/metrics.md#consistent-updowncounter-timeseries)
rather than a `Gauge`. This is a deliberate choice, as it is a reasonable use
case to count objects that are in a particular state. Since the metric value is
either `0` or `1` for a given state attribute value, this means you can do a

> simple sum aggregation to count instances of particular states.

Reviewer 2: We currently don't support `enum` (or string-value) metrics in our metric data model.

I think such metrics need an encoding in OTLP today (in GCP we use an `UpDownCounter` where the value is a label with a known key and the value is always `1`).  I wouldn't outlaw them, but it is something we probably need a way to deal with in OTLP (and the metric data model) itself at some point.

> simple sum aggregation to count instances of particular states.

Reviewer 2: You can use Gauge or UpDownCounter.  The choice of UpDownCounter is so that spatial-aggregation defaults to SUM (vs. Gauge where it would just "pick one").

In both cases the mapping enum is the issue.

### Should it be an Entity Attribute?

It is possible to make the status a descriptive attribute on an entity (**not**
an identifying attribute). The primary upside to making a state metric is for
tracking state changes over time; as an entity attribute, the history of state

> changes would not necessarily be tracked.

Author: What should I rephrase it to? Or should I remove the section altogether? It's kind of a chicken and egg problem; I wrote the guidance in the first place to explain why these things shouldn't be Resource Attributes and to come up with an alternate guidance, but if Entities are built to address this use case then is there ever still a reason to use a metric as described in this document?

> changes would not necessarily be tracked.

Reviewer 2: Apologies, my comment was the thing to say here: "Using a metric timeseries database to track entity state changes is a known use case for Entities. Explicitly defining these state metrics helps metric-centric solutions understand how to interact with Entities."

That's why we want to allow this use case.  So it's not "why entity vs. metric", it's "both"

> changes would not necessarily be tracked.

Author: Took a stab at rewording, does this sound right? Are there any additional qualifying details I might be able to add here?

> changes would not necessarily be tracked.

Reviewer 2: Yeah - that's fine.  Eventually we want a generic way to take Entity-State and turn it into metrics for metric systems, so you COULD call that out, but what's written is fine.

### Naming

> If there is particular verbiage for this sort of thing within the instrumentation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
if there is already well-known naming conventions within the instrumentation
```
Maybe? The doc is very well written but "for this sort of thing" caught me off guard here :D

context, i.e. `k8s` having words like `phase` or `status`, those words should
always be chosen.

If there are not any naming options immediately available, you may use this

> recommended naming scheme.  

Author: This is a Markdown thing, it has to be two spaces.

> This naming scheme necessitates choosing words to represent two things:

Reviewer 4: Info isn't a perfect 1:1 with status metrics.  Many status metrics are not info (e.g. kube_pod_status_ready).  Others are better represented as prometheus stateset type (1's and 0's).  Info is also a broader category that encompasses things like resource or scope attributes.

I think we should use _info metrics when it makes sense in the conversion spec (e.g. target_info, or entity_foo_info), but should move forward with having our own conventions around status metrics.
